Data Warehouse
---------------

Introduction
-------------

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in AWS S3 Bucket, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, my task was to build an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

Project Datasets
----------------

Throught the project we'll be working with two datasets that resides in AWS S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

Song Dataset
------------

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

Schema for Song Play Analysis
-----------------------------

Using the song and event datasets, we'll create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

Fact Table
----------

songplays - Records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page=NextSong

Dimension Tables
----------------

users - users in the app

 * user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level;
songs - songs in music database

 * song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration;
artists - artists in music database

 * artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude;
time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

 * start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday;
 
Project Template
----------------

The project template includes four files:

1. create_table.py - Is where we'll create the fact, dimension and staging tables schemas, staging, fact and dimension tables for the star schema on Redshift.

2. etl.py - Is where we'll load data from S3 into our staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into our analytics (fact & dimension) tables on Redshift.

3. sql_queries.py - Is where we'll define our SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.

4. README.md - Is the current file, in where WE'll provide discussion on our process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.

Project Steps
--------------

Pre-Requirements
----------------

- It's required to already have a AWS account, create IAM credenctials and keep them in a safe place, do not share these keys whit anyone.

- Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3. (It should be in us-west (Oregon) or else we will get a S3 exception while running etl.py stating - "InternalError: S3ServiceException:The S3 bucket addressed by the query is in a different region from this cluster" during staging of data from s3 to redshift as S3 data is present in Oregon West so both needs to be in the same region.)

Below are the steps I followed to complete each component of this project.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Create Table Schemas


2. Design schemas for our fact and dimension tables.

3. Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py.

On this step we defined the create and drop table statement for each of our staging, fact and dimension tables. For more details check sql_queries.py

4. Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables.

In order to connect to Redshift Cluster Database a set of configuration variables were required. For this task a python library named configparser was required.

All the configurations were defined on a file named dwh.cfg
    [CLUSTER]
    HOST=<THE REDSHIFT HOST ENDPOINT>
    DB_NAME=<DATABASE NAME>
    DB_USER=<DATABASE USERNAME>
    DB_PASSWORD=<DATABASE PASSWORD>
    DB_PORT=<DATABASE_PORT>

    [IAM_ROLE]
    ARN=<AWS IDENTITY AND ACCESS MANAGMENT Role to allow Redshift to connect to the S3 bucket>

    [S3]
    LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
    LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
    SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'
    
5. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.

Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.

6. Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in our redshift database. We can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.

7. Build ETL Pipeline
---------------------
    
- Find the details on `etl.py` file
-----------------------------------
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
    
Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on the Redshift database to compare the results with the expected results.
Delete our redshift cluster when finished to avoid extra fees.